#Code book
This file contains the Code book for the `dataset_byActivityAndSubject.txt` dataset, generated by the `run_analysis.R` script.
The data cleaning and processing tasks performed are taking as input the following external dataset:
```
Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset Version 1
Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto.
Smartlab - Non Linear Complex Systems Laboratory
DITEN - Università degli Studi di Genova.
Via Opera Pia 11A, I-16145, Genoa, Italy.
activityrecognition@smartlab.ws
www.smartlab.ws
```

Check `README.md` (in the same folder) for the exact steps to retrieve the original dataset from the web, extract and run the analysis script on it.

##Acknoledgement and License
The following text defines the License restrictions which apply to the dataset used by the data cleaning and processing tasks. 
```
Use of this dataset in publications must be acknowledged by referencing the following publication [1] 

[1] Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. Human Activity Recognition on Smartphones using a Multiclass Hardware-Friendly Support Vector Machine. International Workshop of Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Dec 2012

This dataset is distributed AS-IS and no responsibility implied or explicit can be addressed to the authors or their institutions for its use or misuse. Any commercial use is prohibited.

Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Davide Anguita. November 2012.
```

##Study design
The original dataset has been retrieved from the following url: `https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip`.
Then it has been extracted and processed.

Check the README.md for futher information concerning how you can prepare the environment needed to run the `run_analysis.R` script. 
The README.md describes also in finer detail the performed data processing tasks, which are summarized hereafter:

1. data (X, y, subject) is loaded from the `UCI HAR Dataset` folder into R data frames
2. train and test datasets are merged, generating total datasets
3. the X dataset is projected on the features of type mean and std, selected by name from the feature list data frame
4. the activity ids defined in the y dataset are replaced by the corresponding labels
5. a complete data set is generated, containing X, activities and subjects
6. this complete data set is grouped by activity and subject, and for each group the mean of each column is emitted
7. the resulting data set is saved to disk, as a space-separated text file 

##Code book
The following excerpt from the `features_info.txt` file in the `UCI HAR Dataset`, describes how the data has been collected.
```
The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 

Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 

These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.
```

The data processing tasks performed by `run_analysis.R` on the original dataset produced a result with the following properties:
- the final dataset is an R data frame, persisted as a text space-separated file, named `dataset_byActivityAndSubject.txt`
- the row names are not stored in the file
- the first line of the file contains the column names
- the data consists of 180 observations of 68 variables
- an observation is associated to one of the 30 subjects, indicated with ids from 1 to 30
- the observation took place when the subject was performing a particular activity: WALKING, SITTING, etc...
- some subject have been observed while performing several activities: those cases are mapped as different observations
- for each couple (subject, activity) 33 mean summary values and 33 std summary values, for various variables, are reported

###Columns
The final dataset consist of the following columns:
- **subject: numerical**: 1..30. The subject the observation was taken of;
- **activity**: factor: WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING. The activity the subject was performing when the observation was recorded;
- **tBodyAcc-mean()-X**: numeric. The mean of the body acceleration on the X-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyAcc-mean()-Y**: numeric. The mean of the body acceleration on the Y-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyAcc-mean()-Z**: numeric. The mean of the body acceleration on the Z-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyAcc-std()-X**: numeric. The std of the body acceleration on the X-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyAcc-std()-Y**: numeric. The std of the body acceleration on the Y-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyAcc-std()-Z**: numeric. The std of the body acceleration on the Z-axis in the time domain.
- **tGravityAcc-mean()-X**: numeric. The mean of the gravity acceleration on the X-axis in the time domain.
- **tGravityAcc-mean()-Y**: numeric. The mean of the gravity acceleration on the Y-axis in the time domain.
- **tGravityAcc-mean()-Z**: numeric. The mean of the gravity acceleration on the Z-axis in the time domain.
- **tGravityAcc-std()-X**: numeric. The std of the gravity acceleration on the X-axis in the time domain.
- **tGravityAcc-std()-Y**: numeric. The std of the gravity acceleration on the Y-axis in the time domain.
- **tGravityAcc-std()-Z**: numeric. The std of the gravity acceleration on the Z-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyAccJerk-mean()-X**: numeric. The mean of the Jerk signal for body acceleration on the X-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyAccJerk-mean()-Y**: numeric. The mean of the Jerk signal for body acceleration on the Y-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyAccJerk-mean()-Z**: numeric. The mean of the Jerk signal for body acceleration on the Z-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyAccJerk-std()-X**: numeric. The std of the Jerk signal for body acceleration on the X-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyAccJerk-std()-Y**: numeric. The std of the Jerk signal for body acceleration on the Y-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyAccJerk-std()-Z**: numeric. The std of the Jerk signal for body acceleration on the Z-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyGyro-mean()-X**: numeric. The mean of the body gyroscope 3-axial signal on the X-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyGyro-mean()-Y**: numeric. The mean of the body gyroscope 3-axial signal on the Y-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyGyro-mean()-Z**: numeric. The mean of the body gyroscope 3-axial signal on the Z-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyGyro-std()-X**: numeric. The std of the body gyroscope 3-axial signal on the X-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyGyro-std()-Y**: numeric. The std of the body gyroscope 3-axial signal on the Y-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyGyro-std()-Z**: numeric. The std of the body gyroscope 3-axial signal on the Z-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-X**: numeric. The mean of the Jerk signal for body gyroscope 3-axial on the X-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-Y**: numeric. The mean of the Jerk signal for body gyroscope 3-axial on the Y-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-Z**: numeric. The mean of the Jerk signal for body gyroscope 3-axial on the Z-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyGyroJerk-std()-X**: numeric. The std of the Jerk signal for body gyroscope 3-axial on the X-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyGyroJerk-std()-Y**: numeric. The std of the Jerk signal for body gyroscope 3-axial on the Y-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyGyroJerk-std()-Z**: numeric. The std of the Jerk signal for body gyroscope 3-axial on the Z-axis in the time domain.
- **tBodyAccMag-mean()**: numeric. The mean of the body acceleration magnitude (using the Euclidean norm) in the time domain.
- **tBodyAccMag-std()**: numeric. The std of the body acceleration magnitude (using the Euclidean norm) in the time domain.
- **tGravityAccMag-mean()**: numeric. The mean of the gravity acceleration magnitude (using the Euclidean norm) in the time domain.
- **tGravityAccMag-std()**: numeric. The std of the gravity acceleration magnitude (using the Euclidean norm) in the time domain.
- **tBodyAccJerkMag-mean()**: numeric. The mean of the Jerk signal for gravity acceleration magnitude (using the Euclidean norm) in the time domain.
- **tBodyAccJerkMag-std()**: numeric. The std of the Jerk signal for gravity acceleration magnitude (using the Euclidean norm) in the time domain.
- **tBodyGyroMag-mean()**: numeric. The mean of the body gyroscope 3-axial magnitude (using the Euclidean norm) in the time domain.
- **tBodyGyroMag-std()**: numeric. The std of the body gyroscope 3-axial magnitude (using the Euclidean norm) in the time domain.
- **tBodyGyroJerkMag-mean()**: numeric. The mean of the Jerk signal for body gyroscope 3-axial magnitude (using the Euclidean norm) in the time domain.
- **tBodyGyroJerkMag-std()**: numeric. The std of the Jerk signal for body gyroscope 3-axial magnitude (using the Euclidean norm) in the time domain.
- **fBodyAcc-mean()-X**: numeric. The mean of the body acceleration on the X-axis in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyAcc-mean()-Y**: numeric. The mean of the body acceleration on the Y-axis in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyAcc-mean()-Z**: numeric. The mean of the body acceleration on the Z-axis in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyAcc-std()-X**: numeric. The std of the body acceleration on the X-axis in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyAcc-std()-Y**: numeric. The std of the body acceleration on the Y-axis in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyAcc-std()-Z**: numeric. The std of the body acceleration on the Z-axis in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyAccJerk-mean()-X**: numeric. The mean of the Jerk signal for body acceleration on the X-axis in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyAccJerk-mean()-Y**: numeric. The mean of the Jerk signal for body acceleration on the Y-axis in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyAccJerk-mean()-Z**: numeric. The mean of the Jerk signal for body acceleration on the Z-axis in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyAccJerk-std()-X**: numeric. The std of the Jerk signal for body acceleration on the X-axis in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyAccJerk-std()-Y**: numeric. The std of the Jerk signal for body acceleration on the Y-axis in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyAccJerk-std()-Z**: numeric. The std of the Jerk signal for body acceleration on the Z-axis in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyGyro-mean()-X**: numeric. The mean of the body gyroscope 3-axial signal on the X-axis in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyGyro-mean()-Y**: numeric. The mean of the body gyroscope 3-axial signal on the Y-axis in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyGyro-mean()-Z**: numeric. The mean of the body gyroscope 3-axial signal on the Z-axis in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyGyro-std()-X**: numeric. The std of the body gyroscope 3-axial signal on the X-axis in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyGyro-std()-Y**: numeric. The std of the body gyroscope 3-axial signal on the Y-axis in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyGyro-std()-Z**: numeric. The std of the body gyroscope 3-axial signal on the Z-axis in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyAccMag-mean()**: numeric. The mean of the body acceleration magnitude (using the Euclidean norm) in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyAccMag-std()**: numeric. The std of the body acceleration magnitude (using the Euclidean norm) in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyBodyAccJerkMag-mean()**: numeric. The mean of the Jerk signal for body acceleration magnitude (using the Euclidean norm) in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyBodyAccJerkMag-std()**: numeric. The std of the Jerk signal for body acceleration magnitude (using the Euclidean norm) in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyBodyGyroMag-mean()**: numeric. The mean of body gyroscope 3-axial signal magnitude (using the Euclidean norm) in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyBodyGyroMag-std()**: numeric. The std of body gyroscope 3-axial signal magnitude (using the Euclidean norm) in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag-mean()**: numeric. The mean of the Jerk signal for body gyroscope 3-axial signal magnitude (using the Euclidean norm) in the frequency domain.
- **fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag-std()**: numeric. The std of the Jerk signal for body gyroscope 3-axial signal magnitude (using the Euclidean norm) in the frequency domain.

